Tilly's minimal activities of a state are
War-making – "eliminating or neutralizing their own rivals"
State-making – "eliminating or neutralizing their rivals inside their own territory"
Protection – "eliminating or neutralizing the enemies of their clients"  These first three can be wrapped up into some kind of military system. Maybe even just manpower being leveraged by 3 sliders?
Extraction – "acquiring the means of carrying out the first three activities" - a taxation system - all goods produced can be taxed. Will need a better economic system for this.
Adjudication – "authoritative settlement of disputes among members of the population" - a law and order system A serires of toggles for what is allowed with bonuses/tradeoffs?
Distribution – "intervention in the allocation of goods among the members of the population" - some kind of welfare system 
Production – "control of the creation and transformation of goods and services produced by the population" - hire/fire workers via the law system


Buildings should supply value to a certain amount of population. High value when you have enough, low value if you overbuild or underbuild.
Production and consumption need to be simplified, right now it isn't clear how you get 1 from the other. Maybe describe it as hourly production and daily consumption?

Pretend blind playthrough notes 1:
1. Main screen is empty and should have something in it.
2. It is hard to tell what the effect of hiring or firing someone is.
3. It is hard to tell when your people are not producing enough of something.
4. If there aren't going to be numbers there needs to be some other indicator until numbers are invented. Clay bullae could supply some kind of replacement?

Notes 2.
1. Too many buildings available at the start. -- DONE
2. Lack of numbers makes all the information hard to follow -- MAYBE DONE?
3. Current hint is not prominent enough
4. too hard to tell what is going on.
5. Homelessness rate is  still a number -- DONE
6. Hide Stockpiles, Buildings, Technology, Laws, Modifiers at the start. Maybe have a tutorial menu that only includes some things to start out --DONE
7. Death causes show up wrong. -- DONE
8. Initial tech is too slow.
9. Menu order is bad -- DONE
10. Tech reqs are too loose
11. missing workers are not using formatNumber -- DONE
12. Tech alert should probably only show if there is no focustech -- DONE
13. building menu buttons can jump around as you click -- DONE
14. Hold to spam for buttons would be good. --Just make it not annoying to click
15. It needs to be clearer if you have enough food, etc. -- DONE
16. Wells need to supply more initial water, shouldn't be an issue until you have Numbers unlocked. -- DONE?
17. Use actual units somewhere until numbers are available. -- DONE
18. Clay bullae need clay but its consumed too fast. --Maybe Done
19. Hard to see progress without numbers. --Maybe Done

Ideas:
Main screen should be a shortcut for the specific tasks required in the "tutorial" up to numbers.

Notes 3.
1. If you take too long for the first tech, it instantly completes and feels bad. Min tech time? -- DONE
2. Move the hint to somewhere else
3. Add a notice to Stockpiles if something is going down (Maybe just food or water)
4. There is obviously something wrong with stone and clay production/consumption.
5. The route to unlock clay bullae is impossible with the current setup
6. There should be one or two more good farming techs early on.
7. If writing takes food for example, the hint should include storehouses.

Notes 4.
Idea groups:
Food sources:
Agrarian vs Coastal
Buildings:
One that boosts buildings output, lowers their cost, etc.
One that boosts population, lowers their cost, etc.


These ideas can be added after release, this is scope creep
Governmental Ideas, pick 1:
Plutocratic vs Aristocratic vs Democratic vs Republic vs Autocratic vs Anarchic
(Choice unlocks specific government type, switching types changes the bonuses available)
Technology Ideas:
Innovative vs Luddism
(increase knowledge and sources of knowledge or increase happiness and sources of happiness)
Societal
Caste system, feudalism, 

What currently exists as modifiers?
Population (Not really)
Add Professions
Add Buildings
Profession cost
Profession Output
Building Cost
Building Output
Technology Cost
Production Modifiers
Homelessness?
Stockpiles

Kind of missing some useful layer of modifiers
EU4 has modifiers for currency, stats, and every kind of cost. Vanitasia lacks currency use outside of the physical world.
Ideas need a cost as well, so there is a need to add more to the game to make ideas worth it.
What layer could make sense as society forms?

TODO:
Build a government layer and a society layer that are essentially totally disconnected from the others aside from modifiers.

What should a government screen look like?
governments create laws, collect taxes, provide services


Societal screen?
A second layer of pops related to population but not professions. Some basic stratification at the start, some way for mobility between castes.

Playthrough notes 2/13/26
1. It isn't clear what progress is being made and whether or not my people are eating enough or anything. These ideas need to be more visible to the player so there's a good feedback from making a decision.
2. The Main tab should show the important stockpiles, population summary, and allow for teching up and building buildings etc.
3. Add the setting for disabling charts -- It's the current majority of gametick time just keeping the data up-to-date.
4. Maybe add an option for setting the max history size so players can still get small charts if they want.
Some kind of defacto currency for the govt, pulls from stockpile via tax, used to enact policies

Differentiation between government types
Each govt type should have a different failure state, different actions, and some kind of intrinsic bonus.

Tribal:
fail - Lose half your pops, half your stockpile, double approval rating
actions - 
bonuses - Happiness and something else

Democracy:
fail - Become an oligarchy if approval is low or Monarchy if approval is high
bonuses - Approval boost 
has a democratic tradition that decides if it fails, based on leaders continuing to rule for too long
no real leader, generic bonuses

Republic:
same as democracy but has a leader with bonuses

Oligarchy:
fail - bureaucracy or meritocracy, there are 3 leaders and if two die heirless it changes to a Monarchy
bonuses - govt sucks and is hard to get rid of, bonuses for wealthy classes

Feudalism:


Monarchy:


Bureaucracy:


Meritocracy:

